So, okay, data visualization is what
we are here to talk about, but why?
What are we even talking about?
What is data viz and
why should we as software developers
even care about it in the first place?
Well, we've heard a couple
of reasons already so far.
But, let's go through and take a look at
a few ways we can understand data viz and
how it relates to our day to day in
the world of software development.
So, one way we could
characterize data visualization
is as the process of translating
data to graphical representation.
Not only is that kind of a yawn
inducing definition, but
it also doesn't really tell us a lot about
what the interesting value of data viz is.
So okay, yes, we have some data and we
want a graphical representation of it but
why does that matter?
Why isn't it easier to just look at
the data itself instead of looking at
a graphical representation of it?
Well, one reason is because our bosses
ask us to build data visualizations so
that we can put together things like
dashboards or insight charts in
the web apps that we're being tasked
with building in our day to day work.
So one thing we could say is that,
well as front end developers,
we often have to put visualizations
into the sites that we're building.
Whether it be for internal tooling to
kind of understand our systems better,
or whether it be because the app
that we're building wants to expose
some kind of information to users
about the data that they care about.
And so that means that it is also,
as we said before a very relevant
skill especially in the front
end world but I would say for
software developers in general,
it is a really nice addition to have on
your resume because it pops up in,
sometimes it is an entire job, right?
Of being a data visualization developer.
But sometimes, even if you're doing
front end or full stack development, and
most of the time you
are building those apps.
And take a look at a few ways
we can understand data viz and
how it relates to our day to day.
Got it.
And that's because the reason that we
care about making these graphical
representations of data,
is that by visualizing data, we,
human creatures with are very visual
perception are more quickly and
accurately able to discover meaning and
patterns in that data.
Than if we were just looking at rows and
rows of numbers.
And so this means that data visualization
essentially lets us more easily and
more quickly discover meanings and
patterns And then give us the insights.
So the answers to the questions that we
have that will help us in our day to day,
whether that's as developers and
we're gonna to look at some of the
questions that we can answer with data and
data visualization being a very
effective way to find those answers.
But also, again for our users, right?
If we're building apps and we want
our users to be able to get insight
into their own data or the things
that they care about, using graphical
representations of data is a really great
way to quickly convey that meaning,
that insight to the audience's
that we're trying to help out.
Okay, so
let's take a look at an example here.
We have data,
we're swimming in it these days, right?
It is just coming out our ears.
We have so much of it, but finding meaning
within it, that's the challenging part.
So if we're looking at this data here,
what do folks notice about this data?
Got some rows, got some stuff in here.
Shout it out or in the chat, feel free
to drop it in, what do you notice here?
What does this data say to you?
What do you discover from
looking at these rows?
Anything?
So I'm seeing some URLs here and,
they have GitHub in them.
So it looks like this has
something to do with GitHub maybe.
I also see spelt Js.
So it looks like maybe something
to do with the spelt GitHub repo.
>> Someone said requesting
data from the GitHub API.
>> Yep, exactly,
requesting data from the GitHub API.
I don't know, there's some Shah's
going on there some more URL stuff.
There are some status,
there's a status column here,
everything is completed, success.
Okay, now I'm seeing the word test, so
maybe this has something
to do with tests running.
But I don't know about you all, but
I'm not immediately getting
a lot of value from this data.
I'm not immediately seeing
any kind of patterns or
knowing what I should be understanding.
I've so far gathered, maybe this has
to do with tests running on the spelt
JS repo on GitHub, maybe, but I don't
really know too much more than that.
Now, what we look at it graphically?
So this is the same data, but visualized.
So what can we see here?
Anything else jumping out
to folks that wasn't clear
from the rows of data themselves?
>> It's like showing the frequency of a,
maybe a request to these different nodes.
>> Right, okay, so
we have these ticks happening for
all of these different nodes or
these different rows.
So it looks like something is
happening with some frequency.
Exactly, something is being repeated.
Anything else jump out at folks?
>> Just looks like tests running and
depending on when they finish they
could finish between two and
six minutes or whatever.
>> Right, exactly.
So now we know something about the number
of minutes that each of these tests
took, right?
The duration of them.
Could we get that from just
looking at the rows of data?
With difficulty, maybe I certainly
didn't notice it immediately.
Anything else?
>> The ratio of successes to failures and
canceled tests.
>> Yes, exactly.
So now we have this element
of color coming in.
So we have success displayed in green,
failures displayed in red.
And of course those colors can be
tweaked for better accessibility and
things like that.
But already from that, we can see that
most of the ticks look like they're green.
So it looks like we have a largely
successful runs, we have some gray ones
that are canceled and we can see where
a few red failures jumped out at us,
which maybe is something we'd want to
dig into and take a closer look at.
Okay, so this is just a tiny example
of how, when we're looking at data,
this is in one sense a visualization,
right?
These are these are values set up in rows,
one row for each observation and
one column for each kind of characteristic
or different value of that observation.
But in terms of finding those insights,
like, here are the tests that
are failing or this is how long
most of my tests are taking to run.
That is, I hope you all agree,
much easier to grasp quickly
from a graphical visualization.
So that's the TLDR,
we can all go home now.
No, just kidding.
All right, [LAUGH] so this is what
we're gonna be pouring into today.
We're gonna be discovering how we can
build customized visualizations to give us
the insights that we
particularly care about.
And that's gonna be different for every
particular question that we have, we're
gonna want to set up our visualization in
different ways to give us the answers to
the questions that we care about from
the data that we're working with.
So, now, for
us particularly as developers,
why is data viz super relevant for
our day to day work?
Well, there are a lot of things that
visualizing data and getting those
insights from the visualizations
can help us do as app developers,
as front-end developers,
as full stack developers.
So, for example, when we're
developing features for our user,
if we look at the data, of how
people are actually using our sites,
and our products,
we can find out some really
great information to help us
develop the right things for them.
So for example,
asking what should we build?
Like what issues are folks
struggling with?
What areas of our app are folks
spending the most time on?
What are all of our issues that
folks file on our open source repo?
What patterns are we seeing in there?
Prioritizing use cases.
Later on we're gonna take a look at
visualizing data about the different
types of devices that folks are using
when they visit our site or our app.
And understanding, okay,
most of our users are on this type of
device can help us prioritize things
like the designs that we build,
the features that we
bake in to our platforms.
Understanding whether or not our features
are successful, okay, I just spent
the last six months of my life developing
this really shiny glittery button,
are people clicking it?
How do I know if I don't
actually look at the usage data?
And by visualizing that I can see, okay,
which features that we've built in
the last quarter or year,
whatever, which ones are landing?
Which ones are folks actually
getting a lot of traction from?
And that can help us plan out our roadmap
in the future to know what types of
things folks actually wanna
see on the apps that we built.
And by the same token,
as we are continuously developing
these sites most of the time, right?
It's never a done deal.
We can understand better as we're
iterating on our feature set and
on the functionality and
the user experience of our sites,
we can understand from the data that we
look at how we should progress and what
things we should keep and what things we
should maybe figure out alternatives for.
So in terms of feature development itself,
data visualization, data itself
very valuable and visualizing that data
to see those patterns, super valuable.
Okay, what about performance?
This is an area where data
viz can be super handy,
in terms of understanding how
fast is our system running.
We just saw in the test visualization that
we can get a sense of how long are these
test jobs taking to run.
If we see things taking ten minutes and
so on and so
forth we can dig into those cases and
try to optimize performance.
Similarly, when we're looking at
the performance of different parts of our
site, we're gonna look later at
some data around API responses.
And see, okay, are there certain endpoints
on our site that are taking a really long
time to return responses to the user?
Or are there certain features again,
that we could improve the performance
of by digging into those details in a
visual depiction of that data, we can more
quickly understand where we should focus
our attention where those bottlenecks are.
And we can also understand how
well our improvements are actually
improving things by the same
token reliability, right?
Are we getting a lot of errors or
do we have, for example test jobs that
are really flaky and tend to timeout
all the time or what have you.
So understanding not just speed but
also reliability and
maybe we have different trade offs and in
terms of, maybe it's okay to be slow, but
we want to make sure that 100% of the time
the user is getting what they need.
Other times it might be better to make
the other trade off and say, okay,
we want things to be really fast even if
once in a while something gets dropped.
So being able to look at that and say,
how well is what we're building matching
In our needs or our users needs,
in terms of performance, super useful.
Yeah, and by the same token,
understanding where those bottlenecks
are where we should improve.
And similarly to with feature development,
if we have made some performance
enhancements, being able to prove to
ourselves and to our bosses, of course,
that they actually made a positive impact.
And helped improve the performance
of the site can be
really successfully accomplished by
showing a visualization that says, hey,
look how long this bar was before and
look how short it is now.
So this can also be really useful for
not just finding those insights but
also conveying those insights to others.
The final area that I think it
bears mentioning in terms of how
visualization can help us as developers
is understanding our code and
our development practices themselves.
So not just the site's than
the features that we build but
actually the process of
development that we engage in.
So if we look at data about our code
base or about the contributions to our
code base, for example if it's a GitHub
repo we can quite easily discover
a lot of interesting things from
the data that GitHub exposes.
We can understand things like how
is the codebase organized, right?
What is the relative size of different
directories in the codebase or
which are the parts of the codebase
that are quickly moving and
changing a lot and
which are the ones that are more
stable that are sitting more
kind of in stasis as it were?
When we're talking about our
development workflow, again,
we just looked at some test jobs
from continuous integration.
If those jobs are failing all the time or
taking a really long time,
that means our development workflow
is gonna be a little bit laborious,
it's gonna feel sticky and
difficult to move through.
So how can we make that smoother?
Or if we're looking at things like,
how long does it take for
our site to deploy once I make a change?
How can I improve that process?
How can I make it a smoother faster
process from merging a change in
to the codebase to getting that up
in front of my user, for example?
Likewise, we can visualize different
notions of productivity and
I'm using quotes around
productivity here because I think,
we as teams need to define what our
own notions of productivity are.
It's not always going to be
sort of these archaic metrics,
like lines of code written
in number of hours.
But maybe it'll be things like, for
example how quickly are we able to respond
to open source contributions if folks
open an issue on our open source repo?
How long do they have to wait
before we get back to them?
Or how long do our developers
have to wait for their PRs,
their pull requests to get
reviewed by other teammates?
Or how does collaboration across different
projects in our organization work?
So understanding notions of productivity
and visualizing that data so
that the team can, again,
have smooth our collaboration and
a more pleasant day to
day as we work together,
as we collaborate is a really great
application in data viz as well.
And yes, similarly if we do have
open source projects weather as
perhaps individual labor of love,
open source maintenance or
maybe we work on open source for
a living day to day.
Understanding how the contributor
community interfaces with that project can
be a really useful way to take a look
at some contribution data for example,
again from GitHub.
And understand okay, how many new
contributors do we have every month for
example?
Or how many folks come
back time after time and
continuously file bug reports
to help us out etcetera.
So, this is another kind of area,
this notion of the the meta level of
how well our development workflows and
practices functioning that we can get some
really solid answers to by visualizing
data about our code bases and
our contribution and collaboration.